Excellencies Namaskar!

Today, you are all welcome at the launch of 'One Sun, One World, One Grid'. With the initiatives from the International Solar Alliance and the UK's Green Grid Initiative, my many-year-old vision of 'One Sun, One World, One Grid' got a concrete shape today. Excellencies, the industrial revolution was fuelled by fossil fuels. Many countries have prospered by the use of fossil fuels, but our earth, our environment have become poor. The race for fossil fuels also created geo-political tensions. But today technology has given us a great alternative.

Excellencies,

In the Surya Upanishad, thousands of years ago, it was said, सूर्याद् भवन्ति भूतानि, सूर्येण पालितानि तु॥ (Suryaad bhavanti bhutani, suryen palitani tu)In other words, everything has originated from the Sun, the source of all energy is the Sun, and everything is sustained by the energy of the Sun. Ever since life originated on Earth, the life cycle of all living beings, and their routine, has been linked to the sunrise and sunset. As long as this natural connect has continued, our planet remained healthy. But in modern era, man in the race to overtake the cycle set by the sun, disturbed the natural balance, and caused great damage to his environment. If we are to re-establish a balanced life with nature, the path of this will be illuminated by our sun. We have to walk along with the sun again to save the future of humanity.

Excellencies

The quantum of energy that the entire human race consumes in a year, the sun gives the same amount of energy to the earth in one hour. And this enormous energy is completely clean, sustainable. The only challenge is that solar energy is available only during the day and is also weather dependent. ‘One Sun, One World, One Grid’ is a solution to this challenge. Clean energy from a world-wide grid will be available everywhere at all times. This will also reduce the need for storage and increase the viability of solar projects. This creative initiative will not only reduce the carbon footprint and cost of energy, but will also open a new avenue of cooperation between different regions and countries. I am confident that the synergy of One Sun: One World: One Grid and Green-Grid Initiatives will lead to the development of a cohesive and robust global grid.

I also want to inform today that our space agency, ISRO is going to present a solar calculator application to the world. With this calculator, the solar power potential of any place in the world can be measured based on satellite data. This application will be useful in deciding the location of solar projects and will also strengthen 'One Sun, One World, One Grid'.

Excellencies

Once again, I congratulate ISA, and thank my friend Boris for his cooperation. I would also like to express my gratitude to the leaders of all other countries for their presence.

Thank you!